>> Excellent, ladies and gentlemen, good
morning.
Welcome to OSPO for Good.
This is our fourth day at the UN open source
week, and it's a very special day for us.
It's very special because this is how
everything started.
The start of the open source week was OSPO
forGood
then it expanded to the open source
weeks,but we made sure we keep thatsegment
and
keep giving it a full day of attention.
And what began asa small butpassionate
community has since grown into
global movement.
I remember we were 60 people in 2023.
It's incredible to see thatthis year we
passed the 1,400
and we're extremely grateful forall of
you.
We have over 100 countries WHO are
represented in this conference this week.
But despite remarkable growth, we had kept
OSPO for Good at the heart of the program
because we believe that
institutionalization of open source within
different organizations
is one of the most important challenge and
opportunity we can all face together.
Also, it's very important and meaningful
for us because we are also as United Nations
at the heart of our open source adoption,
and we're looking for a way to scale
our open source engagement and adoption.
Since the last time we met, we have
achieved some very important milestone.
I'm particularly pleased that
the UN open source principles have now
passed 250 organizations
around the world WHO endorsed them.
That's a remarkable achievement.
Let me do a show of hand.
Please raise your hand if your organization
endorsed the UN open source principles.
Thank you to all of you, those WHO did
not.
Please, open your phone. Open source that
UN.org.
Open source that UN.org, there's a page
about the principle.
Please learn more about them, please
endorse them.
We want you to join this global movement.
It's really the recognition thatopen
source
it comes to complement the existing
principles
of open source, and it has to be open in
the hand of everyone.
In fact, the principle for us is not just
a declaration of intent.
There are practical framework for
organizations seeking to institutionalize
open source
and maximize its benefit.
Throughout the day today,we will hear
froman outstanding and
diverse group of speakers.
We have very little panels,I think there's
just one in the morning and
two in the afternoon
but in between andit was done becausewe
heard fromyou to give more space for
engagement.
So in between the two panels, there's a
lot of breakout sessions.
So some of them will take place here, some
will be in the basement.
We will give instruction, you can go on the
program to find where all these break out,
but really they're designed to be a space
where we can engage and hear from all of you.
So it was done in purpose
but in the panels you'll see we have an
incredible selection
of speakers coming from government,
academia, private sector and foundations.
And I really encourage you, all of you, to
participate, share your experience,
challenge the assumptions and shape us,
build OSPO for good.
With this, I just once again, on behalf of
the organizers,
the UN Office of Information Communication
Technology
and the UN Office of Digital and Emerging
Technology, thank all of you.
I know you flew from very far.
Let's do another show of hand.
Please raise your hand if you're not from
New York City.
You flew, you came from somewhere.
Wow, raise your hand if you're not from the
United States, you flew from even further.
Wow, I think this deserves a round of
applause.
We're incredibly grateful for all of you
for giving us your time
and really hope that you take it the best
of this conference.
So with this, I just want to now give the
floor to her excellency,
Madam Amal Al-Filaj Saroshni, the minister
delegate to the head of government
in charge of digital transition, administration
reform of the Kingdom of Morocco.
You have the floor, ma'am.
[applause] Thank you very much.
Thank you very much.
Good morning. Good morning.
Hello. I gained some time, some minutes.
Excellencies,ladies andgentlemen
this language is representative of the
United Nations
dear partners. It is a great honor for the
Kingdom of Morocco to contribute
alongside the United Nations to the opening
of this week dedicated to open source
and the future of digital transformation.
We are meeting at a decisive moment.
Digital technologies now shape our public
administrations,
critical infrastructure, public services,
competitiveness,
and increasingly the very exercise of our
sovereignty, digital sovereignty.
In this context, every nation must address
a fundamental question.
How can we fully benefit from global
innovation while retaining control
over our technological choices?
From Morocco, strategic economy rests on
the capacity to make informed choices
cooperate with confidence, maintain
control over our data,
secure our infrastructure, and direct
technology towards our national priorities.
This ambition is pursued under the high
guidance of his majesty,
King Muhammad VI, may God assist him, WHO
has placed artificial intelligence,
emerging technologies, and digital
transformation among the key drivers of the
Kingdom's economic, social, and human
development.
Indeed, digital technology represents
structural transformation
and enables the emergence of new patterns
of production and consumption,
expands investment opportunities, and
creates new prospects for employment.
Employment.
It is in this spirit that Morocco is
building what we call a third digital path.
This path combines international openness
with national governance.
It draws on global standards,
technological partnerships,
the articulation of knowledge and access
to the best innovations,
while remaining deeply rooted in our legal
framework,
our languages, our culture, our social
needs, and our strategic interest.
Open sums plays an essential role in this
vision.
It strengthens transparency, promotes
interoperability, facilitates auditing
and enables institutions to adapt the
tools they use.
It also supports the reversibility of
public sector choices
and the long-term control of our critical
digital systems.
This openness must be genuine and very
fable.
It must enable people to use, study,
modify, and share a technology.
In the field of artificial intelligence,
this means considering the model's
weights, code, documentation, training,
training conditions, and the effective
rights granted to its users.
For us, open source is therefore an instrument
of sovereignty through its capability,
the capability to understand, adapt,
audit, secure, and continuously
improve the technologies we use.
This conviction lies at the heart of our
digital Morocco 2030 strategy
and our AI made in Morocco roadmap.
Our ambition is to make Morocco a country
able to understand technologies,
adapt them to its realities, contribute to
their development,
and produce its contextualized solutions.
This ambition is already being translated
into concrete initiatives.
I will cite some of them.
We are developing artificial intelligence
models
and technological building blocks, adapted
to Arabic, Deirija, and Amazir.
For example, Morocco languages, a technology
that understands the citizens' language
can improve access to public services and
transform everyday life.
We are also prioritizing specialized
resource efficient
and targeted models designed to address
concrete needs in public administration,
education, healthcare, agriculture, law,
water management, and cybersecurity.
We have learned that the Jezari
Institute's network,
deployed across the kingdom, 12 regions,
to connect universities,
researchers, public administration,
start-ups and companies
around applied artificial intelligence
projects.
This territorial network reflects a core
conviction innovation must emerge
as close as possible to real needs and
benefit every region.
We have also established joint laboratory
with Mr. AI,
built around applied research, code
design, and skills transfer.
It will enable our engineers to
participate fully in the design adaptation,
evaluation and security models, while
allowing sensitive solutions
to be deployed in nationally controlled
environments.
Opening models and
their component also enables the creation
of genuine digital commands
tools, evaluation frameworks, software
building blocks,
and sector-specific models that can be
reused by public administrations,
researchers, start-ups, and SMEs.
This technological ambition is accompanied
with major investment in human capital.
Morocco aims to train 100, 000 new digital
talents every year by 2030.
Strategic autonomy depends just as much on
skills as it does on infrastructure.
It also requires tangible technological
capacity.
Morocco's portfolio of data center
projects represent a projected capacity
of approximately 1 gigawatt by 2030,
combining sovereign infrastructure,
cloud services, computing capacity, and
renewable energy.
These investments will allow us to
determine where our data is hosted,
how our models are operated
and under what conditions our critical
services are secured.
This approach extends across the full
spectrum of public action.
In public procurement, we intend to better
integrate criteria
relating to reversibility,
interoperability, probability,
and accessibility, sorry, and access to
essential components.
As part of public administration
modernization,
we are building shared foundation and open
interfaces.
Our national interoperability platform has
already processed more than 52 million
transactions
and why the identity my administration
means,
portal documents over 2, 450
administrative procedures
across more than 120 public
administration.
These results illustrate the gradual
transition from fragmented administration
to an administration designed as a
platform.
For sensitive users, we combine openness
with strong requirements in cyber security,
personal data protection, traceability,
and human oversight.
Open source is therefore embedded within
framework of trust,responsibility
and security.
This combination enables it to become a
sustainable driver of transformation.
Morocco also considers open source to be a
powerful instrument of international
cooperation.
This approach is fully aligned with the
vision of his Majesty King Mohammed VI,
May God assist him
forsolidarity-based,practical
and capacity-centered South cooperation.
His Majesty has notably called for the
mobilization of the necessary financial
and human resources, with particular
emphasizes
on harnessing African talent capable of
developing digital solutions
adapted to the cultural, social,
specificities of our countries.
Through the Digital Force Sustainable
Development Hub, D4SD Hub,
launched with the United Nations
Development Programme, Penud, or UNDP,
we seek to contribute to the design,
experimentation,
and deployment of inclusive digital solutions
forthe benefits of the Arab world and
Africa
a continent of 1.4 billion people,
and one of the major frontiers of
artificial intelligence in the country.
With a programme budget of 38 million US
dollars over three years,
the Hub will pull expertise and accelerate
solutions in areas such as health care,
education, climate resilience, governance,
and digital public infrastructure.
Our conviction is that countries of the
Global South have a central role
to play in designing technologies,
adapting them to their realities
and contributing to the development of the
standards and governing them.
Africans will build their own models.
A statement that seemed ambitious only
recently is now becoming a reality
and the open source will be a decisive
instrument in making it possible.
Opening the code must therefore go
hand-in-hand,
with opening access to capabilities,
ecosystems, and opportunities.
Ladies and gentlemen, in a world marked by
technology fragmentation,
Morocco intends to remain a bridge between
Africa, the Arab world, Europe,
and the Atlantic space between innovation
and regulation,
and between sovereignty and cooperation.
We believe that the digital future will be
shaped by nations
that are able to cooperate while remaining
in control of their choices.
This is the vision we wish to share
throughout this week.
Open technologies serve interests,
resilience, innovation,
and our collective capacity to act. Thank
you very much.
(Applause) Thank you very much.
Thank you very much, Excellency, for your
keynote.
Next, in our list of speakers, we're very
honored to give the floor
to Excellency, Angela Kiruk, Minister of
Information Communication Technology
of the Republic of Tanzania.
(Applause) Excellency's distinguished
fellow Honorable Ministers,
the leaders of the industry and the open
source community,
esteemed panelists, ladies and gentlemen,
good morning to you.
Let me begin with a question that sits at
the heart of every government
represented in this room,WHO actually
truly owns the digital systems that
serve our people.
For too long, for too many nations, the
answer was someone else,
a license that we did not write, a
platform that we could not inspect,
a dependency that we could not break.
Today, I'm very proud to say that for
Tanzania, the answer is changing,
and open source is the result for that
change.
It is a profound honor to share a few
reflections on open source as
a critical trigger
for the digitalization of the government,
a path to genuine digital sovereignty,
but also to adapt our systems that put
citizens fast.
Excellency is when we embrace open source
technology.
We do far more than reducing the licensing
costs.
We change our posture in the world from
passive consumers of technology
to become active creators of technology.
We build the infrastructure that we
control, safeguard and own.
We keep our nation's digital destiny
family in our own hands.
And this is what digital sovereignty means
in practice, not to be in isolation,
but ownership, not dependence, but
partnership in our own terms.
Distinguished participants, the United
Republic of Tanzania,
does not speak of this in theory.
We are leaving the practice, built on the
three pillars of progress.
First, it's the right League of
Foundations.
Under the E-Government Authority Act of
2020 for Tanzania,
we changed the rules of the game.
We empowered our public institutions to
move away
from fragmented, costly proprietary
licenses and to build instead
on flexible, open source software that are
running on shared national infrastructure.
It is for this reason that today more than
90% of our government systems
are built on open source technologies and
all around them,
laws such as the personal data protection
out of 2023,
the Cyber Crimes Act and our own
electronic and postal communications law
allow us to safeguard citizens' privacy,
secure our services,
and exchange data seamlessly across the
government,
through open interfaces and connected
services that are full in-house.
Second, it is the clear institutional
leadership.
Through our E-Government Authority, we
created a single point of coordination,
one body to set the standards and
to enforce technical compliance across the
government.
The result is discipline.
Every new system must contribute and draw
from our shared public infrastructure.
Our data is never locked away,
and even a shtazanian shielding of digital
investment is built to last,
but also to be enhanced, not discarded and
replaced.
Third, it is an empowered workforce.
We took the funds once spent on external
vendors
and expensive licenses and invested them
in our own people.
We've done capacity building for 500
public officials
that have been trained as a collaborative
or community of internal developers,
citizens building for citizens,
owning the very systems that they create.
Excellencies, Tanzania's experience proves
a simple truth.
With the right laws, with the clear
leadership,
and an empowered workforce, building an
independent digital infrastructure,
it is not the privilege of a wealthy few,
but it is within reach of every nation
that is willing to choose it.
And this is precisely why open-source
program offices for good matter so deeply.
Ospots turn good intentions into lasting
institutions.
They are how government share what works,
reuse what others have built,
and give back to global commons for
digital public goods.
They are how the open-source promises of
the global digital compact
that are becoming real for ordinary people
in a clinic,
be it in a classroom, be it in a tax
office.
And they are how South-South Corporation
moves from words to working code.
What we have built in Daris Alam can serve
King Shasa,
can serve Nairobi, can serve Kingston, can
serve Rabaa and other places.
When we open our solutions, we multiply
them.
So it is my call to every leader, to every
innovator,
but also every partner present here today.
Let us sustain the momentum.
Let us break down the silos between our
institutions and organizations and countries,
and across our borders.
Let us build adaptable, transparent
systems that put our citizens,
not our vendors at the very centre.
Open-source has ended as the key to our
own innovation.
Let us use them together to secure a
digitally sovereign, inclusive,
and a prosperous future for all
organizations.
I thank you very much.
I thank her Excellency for her key
remarks.
So my next speaker is Mr. Bernardo Mariano
Jr.
He is the UN Assistant Secretary General
and the Chief Information Technology
Officer of the organization.
Good morning Excellencies, distinguished
guests, colleagues,
members of this vibrant open-source
community.
Let me first say welcome.
Welcome to United Nations headquarters.
Building the success of the previous
editions of this symposium,
I would also like to extend my gratitude
to all of you WHO have travelled miles
coming from 100 different countries to come
here to take part of your valuable time,
to share, to collaborate, to keep this
passion that the open-source communities have
and bring it to United Nations.
Your presence demonstrates this growing
strength of diversity, of global reach,
but also of the value of open-source to
all of us.
I also want to thank our co-hosts,
partners, sponsors, and many volunteers
that made this event possible.
Open-source, as Minister Angela mentioned,
is like bringing true sovereignty
into digital ecosystem.
Imagine a situation where one individual,
because there's a big company,
can turn off or turn on systems that you
use in your own countries.
In the digital ecosystem in today's world,
you know that's not an utopia.
It's a reality. And guess what can counter
that?
Nothing else than open-source.
So what you have to bring into this world
is not just what United Nations can bring
by talking to the different
countries,having a general assembly and
a security council.
It is what you do. Fast-track the
development of open-source.
Fast-track, open-source AI, fast-track
everything that you're doing in open-source,
because that is the antidote to what we
could see as either anarchy
or perhaps just full control of the world
by very few.
And you know, human history, that never
ends well.
So you have a big role to play.
So let's do it, and let's do it together.
We are here at the various extraordinary
technological transformation times,
where economies, elections are changing.
We see fragmentation, we see standards
that are not there too.
We see governance that is discussed where
they should be there or shouldn't be there.
But you are the alternative.
Open-source is the alternative to that.
With your help, we can be very powerful to
change how we build this digital ecosystem
that does not have a physical border.
With your help, we can share knowledge
rather than duplicate therefore.
With your help, we can build digital
solutions to serve public interests.
So hosting this event here, that reflects
the alignment between the principles
of open-source, but also the values of the
UN.
For me, this event is like UN is walking
the talk.
We are not just sitting down and saying,
"Can't you do this and that?
The world should be more peaceful, we
should have SDG."
No, we are doing it by having this event,
by bringing you together,
looking at the solutions, try to fast-track
the development of that open-source.
And as we are trying to work the talk in
the United Nations,
especially in my office of social
information and communication technology,
we are using part of the enterprise
systems open-source technology
and I will mention three examples.
Every time you search any resolution of
United Nations in the web,
on Google,whatever platform you
search,that result thatyou get comes from
an open-source tool.
We call it the official document system.
So every resolution of a general assembly,
every resolution of a secret council,
it is hosted, it is stored in an
open-source platform.
So thank you forall these communities
thatare supporting that
particular open-source tool.
Everybody that applies for a job in UN, in
terms of career portal,
we have an open-source tool there that we
also built recently in AI,
open-source, to help both the candidates
but also the hiring managers worldwide.
I also want to say thank you for the
community open-source that supports that.
And the third is the websites.
The standard UN website is hosted by
open-source tool.
So that's all our web presence is powered
by open-source.
Perhaps we should have that tag powered by
open-source.
So this is just to show thatopen-source
for
United Nations in bio-office is not just a
technological choice.
It's a strategic enabler for innovation
and that we couldn't do that without you.
So I want to say let's keep going far and
going fast as in African terms.
I'm from Mozambique. We say there's a say
that if you want to go far, go alone.
If you want to go fast, go alone.
If you don't go far, go together.
We want to go far and fast and together.
I also want to mention the launch of
open-source portal.
It's a gateway that shows case open-source
initiatives.
Omar mentioned to you open-source. UN.org.
That will gather all the open-source
initiatives across the UN.
So please visit.
In the process of visiting, endorse the
open-source principles and as Omar mentioned,
more than 200 organizations endorse the
principles,but also those covers government
international organization
academia, civil society, private sector.
But I want to recognize the last
endorsement
one of the last endorsements of the city
of Barcelona
which became the first city in the world
to formally endorse the principles,
but also the government of South Africa
that
became the first African government to
endorse the principles.
We want to see more.
And I want to ask you andall the countries
and
member states to continue to endorse this
principle
because that is the antidote for what we
don't want to see repeating in this world.
In the digital ecosystem.
In parallel, we also have an open-source
community of practice in the United Nations
to make sure that we just don't use, but
also we give back.
But on top of everything, we also promote
and strengthen this collaboration across.
But I also wanted to recognize the
flagship initiative that reboot the Earth,
which has reached the eighth locations
across six countries.
And I'm happy to announce for the first
time the edition will be held in Brazil,
expanding our reach to South America
region to bring those innovators
those young innovators.
And I want to welcome the winners of 2025
edition WHO
have joined us in these open-source weeks.
So welcome andthank you,congratulations
to the winners of the reboot the Earth
initiative.
But you are here. And there's a formal
program.
There's an informal program.
There's a coffee break. There is side
events.
I encourage you to use it all.
To network,to use it all,to exchange ideas
because not everything is born out of a
regular formal meeting.
Can be born out of a coffee break.
Can be born out of an event that you
attend.
And a few of you meet together and think
about it.
So yeah, I look very much forward to see that
those exchange of ideas, that creativity,
that passion thatthe open-source community
had,it translates intofast and
more greater things
that we can do together in these fast
andgrowing digital ecosystem that
if we're not there
if we don't bring the antidote of the
open-source,some will be the winners and
many will be the losers.
So we want to find a win-win situation,
and that's where open-source comes through.
So thank you very much.
Thank you for being here, wishing you a
productive day, and let's do it.
Let's do it. Thank you. (Applause)
I thank the UN Assistant Secretary
General, Mr. Bernardo Mariano Jr.
Our next speaker would be from,we heard
fromgovernment
from international organizations
and we're going to hear from civil
society.
So my next speaker would be Jim Zemling
the Chief Executive Officer of Linux
Foundation.
(Applause) Thank you. Good morning,
everyone.
I want to thank the United Nations for
having us here today.
This is an incredible group.
How many people here have heard of the
Linux Foundation before?
Oh, wow. That's a lot of you.
Before I talk, I think it's important to
understand the role of the Linux Foundation
and my role in open-source.
I've been working in open-source for 22
years.
In fact, I got this job when I first met
my wife on a blind date.
She is a graduate of Harvard Business
School.
She's a tech exec.
And when I told her I work at this small
nonprofit and we kind of give away software,
the look of disappointment was just
helpable.
And that kind of thing keeps you humble in
the open-source community.
And I think that's the premise and what I
want to go through in this talk
as I talk aboutartificial intelligence and
some of the challenges in open-source
resulting in that.
Someone just before this talk reminded me
of the most important concept in
open-source
and that is humility.
That the Linux Foundation and
our family of projects are just a small
part of the open-source community.
That the open-source community is actually
a diaspora of hundreds of thousands of
individuals
and organizations that all make this rich
tapestry together.
Some of those leaders are in this room
today.
Duane O'Brien, I think, is here from the
open-source initiative,
WHO the creators of the open-source
definition.
Mike Mollinkovich is here today.
He's the Executive Director of the Eclipse
Foundation.
Ruth Sully is here today.
She's the Executive Director of the Apache
Software Foundation.
Karen Sandler is in the room today.
She is the Executive Director of the
Software Freedom Conservancy.
And I could take my entire time to keep
going here
but I just wanted to mention a few
and remind everyone that the Linux
Foundation is one part of this community,
and we're very grateful to be a part of
that community.
Today,I thought I would talk about
how open-source is impacting artificial
intelligence
and how artificial intelligence is
conversely impacting open-source,
so thatyou can all get an idea of the
opportunities and
the challenges around open-source
as it relates to AI. There's a famous movie
in the United States that has a saying,
"Sometimes you eat the bear, and sometimes
the bear eats you.
Sometimes you win, sometimes you get
challenges."
The good news in artificial intelligence
as it relates to open-source,
if you think of the layers of technology
that are required to deploy AI
from a GPU and a data center to the software
that is used to run that data center,
to the software that is used to train
models, to the models themselves,
to the agent frameworks on top of that.
Just above the hardware, open-source is
the entire stack.
Every layer,at the operating system
layer,Linux,at the inference and
deployment layer
Kubernetes, at the training layer,
PyTorch, at the agentic layer,
open frameworks like MCP and much, much
more.
Top to bottom, the entire stack is built
on open-source,
and that's critical for any organization
or government that wants to leverage
artificial intelligence.
Even in open-weight models, open-source is
very, very close,
and these days, three to six months behind
frontier models.
I think we're going to see this year,
people start paying much more attention
to open models, not just because they're
very, very good,
but because they're very cost-effective.
The Linux Foundation and Harvard did a
study last year
on the costs of open models versus
proprietary API consumption,
and we found that roughly $50 billion a
year is overspent on models
that could have -- on work that could have
been done using open-weight models,
and I think we're going to see even more
transition to open models
as people start to realize the economic
value of that.
So I think that we are doing well in
open-source
as a fundamental building block of
artificial intelligence,
where we're having some challenges is in a
couple of areas.
One, in data. Unfortunately, we are seeing
the world go from an Internet,
which was very open and shared a lot of
data,
to unfortunately a world where data is
getting a little more closed
and a little more scarce.
Now you have tools from organizations that
can block crawlers
to get access to what had been
traditionally open data.
We're seeing the licensing and sort of
hoarding the large-scale data initiatives,
and I'm hoping that the Linux Foundation
and other organizations like us
can help in a counterweight to that
building open consortiums of shared data.
For example, we have our Overture Maps
project,
which is the largest shared geospatial
mapping data infrastructure in the world.
For every action, there's a reaction, and
as we see more closed data,
I'm hoping we'll see a reaction just like
we saw in proprietary software
to open source from closed data to
intentional open data sharing.
Governments around the world can be a big
part of that effort.
So I think that's one of the big
challenges in AI
as it relates to the concept of openness.
But I want to spend a few of my final
moments on the most immediate and
urgent challenge
that artificial intelligence poses to open
source.
And that is in the area of cybersecurity.
Today, the mean time to exploit for a
vulnerability in software,
proprietary -- oh, or open source, this
isn't just about open source,
is now negative seven days.
If maybe in 2018, 2020, that time was 60
days.
The speed at which a vulnerability can be
discovered and exploited now is faster
than we can keep up with in terms of our
ability to patch.
And sowhen you think aboutthis
when you look at these artificial
intelligence models
the good harness being used by attackers
to exploit vulnerabilities in software,
that is an immediate urgent daunting
problem.
The good news is,the defenders
in this case the deus spore of open source
maintainers
have access to the same technology to
defend the stack.
And this is something that I think
requires nothing more than willpower.
Setting aside all of our collective
competitive differences in the corporate world
are differences in the open source world.
And let me tell you, there are a lot of
differences of opinion in open source.
And exercising the will to come together
and retire 20 plus years of technical debt
by building a group of organizations and
maintainers that can use this AI technology
to scan,to find vulnerabilities
but most importantly come to the most
critical people
the open source maintainers,to provide
them working code thatthey can merge into
their software easily
without extra burden on them so
that we can collectively secure the corpus
of open source software.
And the final thought I'll leave you
withis when
Jim says corpus of open source software
what does that mean? It means roughly a
million open source projects.
These are not the 80 million repos on
GitHub
these are the million open source projects
starting fromLinux andthen long tail
dependencies and
kind of every software component out there
that are used in production systems and
critical infrastructure, banking systems,
telecommunications, utilities, the energy
sector, government systems.
It's a million different discrete
components and
we need to look at every single one of
them
leverage this intelligence and
spend the next six to 12 months hardening
this software
getting it secure, leveraging this
technology to make that happen.
And if we can exercise thatwill,we will
restore the equilibrium between attackers
anddefenders
in the cybersecurity world.
Most importantly, and this is for the open
source community to understand the most,
a lot of us have been working in here for
20 plus years, some 30, 40.
It took us this long to create open source
as a trusted resource.
That trust can be broken if we do not meet
this moment and
collectively work together
come together to collectively secure this
large ecosystem of open source components.
So that is, I think, the most immediate
and urgent challenge that AI presents us.
The good news is that we have these tools.
The good news is that the entire stack is
built on open source.
The good news is that we can counter
closed data with open data,
and the Linux Foundation looks forward to
working with all of our partners
and all the governments around the world
to do just that.
Thank you. [applause] Thank you very much,
Mr. Jim Zemling.
Our next and last speaker before we start
our panel today will be Louise McKeever.
She's the government CIO
Chief Information Officer at the
Department of Public Expenditure
Public Service Reform and Digitization of
Ireland.
Louise, you have a floor.
[applause] Good morning, everyone, and
distinguished guests.
I'm absolutely delighted to be here.
I visited New York a couple of times, but
this is my first time in the UN,
so it's an absolute privilege to be here
and talk a little bit about open source
and digital sovereignty in a connected
world,and thatwill be from
an Irish perspective.
Just give you a little background.
I took up their oldest government CIO a
month ago, so I want to thank you all
for coming here today and celebrating my
one-month work anniversary,
but I'm no stranger to operating across
government.
Previously,I worked forfive anda half
years as
the CIO in the Department of
Agriculture,Food andMarine
where their policy is open source first.
So their technology stack is built on open
source, which is very much aligned
to the systems andservices forcentral
government
our enterprise systems are also built on
open source technologies.
So one of my mandates is to drive digital
government,
so the technology stack will be the
enabler to drive digital government,
but it's not just the technology that's
going to drive,
it's also collaboration.
I think collaboration has been a big focus
of discussions over the last couple of
days.
So I'm going to start by talking or
sponsoring three questions,
which I can get it to work now, apologies,
which is what is digital sovereignty,
why is it becoming a priority for
governments,
and how can open source help Ireland build
more resilient public services.
So digital sovereignty is the ability of
an organization and
in my situation government
to maintain control over its digital
infrastructure, data and technologies.
In today's environment of cross-border
data flows,
AI advancement and geopolitical risk,
digital sovereignty is a national security
concern.
So digital sovereignty is about choice and
resilience.
Why is it becoming a priority for
governments?
While public services are increasingly
digital
we talked a lot the last couple of days
aboutdigitalization.
And in Ireland,to drive digitalization,we
have what's known as
the Better Public Services 2030 plan.
And division is for a professional,
innovative and agile public service
that is responsive, reliable, fair, open
and trustworthy.
These drivers of trust are central to all
reform efforts.
The requirement of 2030 is to have 100% of
public services available online,
and 90% of applicable services are
consumed digitally.
Digital sovereignty is also a priority for
governments
due to increasing focus on cyber security,
resilience and data control.
So how can open source help Ireland build
more resilient public services?
And we've heard a lot about the benefits
of open source,
obviously over the last couple of days
but just to name a few is greater
transparency
improve interoperability, the ability to
adapt solutions to public sector needs,
and collaboration across public service
bodies,
which is a key driver of Ireland's digital
government agenda.
So open source and digital sovereignty in
practice.
So how does open source contribute to
digital sovereignty?
Well,by increasing control,improving
resilience,supporting security and
building capability.
It is built through trusted technology
choices, secure architecture
and an open approach that gives
governments and organisations
the ability to shape, adapt and govern
their digital environments.
From Ireland's perspective, we're at a
critical point,
or a very important point in Ireland's
digital journey.
Across governments, we are working to
deliver public services
that are more connected, more consistent
and easy to use.
Our vision is clear to provide inclusive,
high quality and integrated public services
that meet people's needs and improve their
everyday lives.
A whole of government approach sets out to
help departments
address key strategic investment questions
and choose effective scalable
technology-based solutions.
And in particular, to help them to consider
using digital public infrastructure,
a lot of what we spoke about yesterday,
for economies of scale and ROI, return of
investment.
The digital public services plan, as
mentioned, is Ireland's roadmap
to fully digital, customer user-centric
and inclusive public services,
aiming to meet that 100% services online
by 2030, as mentioned.
At the core of the plan is the life events
approach,
and I know that was mentioned yesterday,
where we reorganized services around,
I suppose, critical or significant moments
in people's lives or citizens' lives,
such as becoming a parent, starting
school, learning to drive,
accessing housing and planning for
retirement.
The plan introduces government digital
blocks to support service delivery,
including a government digital wallet and
shared digital platforms,
which enable collaboration across public
service bodies.
Now,I stand to be corrected here
but I believe Ireland is the only member
state in EU
that is pursuing both life events as a
methodology
and the GovStack Building Blocks
architecture, as our target architecture,
working with partners and providers WHO
are all supporting
our open-source development efforts.
A key enabler of Ireland's transformation
is the government digital wallet,
which I mentioned, and at a high level,
the wallets will give people a secure
and convenient way to prove WHO they are
to store important documents
and to access services more easily.
It has the potential to simplify how
people interact with the state
at important points in life, and it is
underpinned by strong principles,
such as privacy, security and user
control,
ensuring that individuals decide what
information they share and when they share it.
For government and the wider public
service, the wallet also has many benefits.
It can support more efficient and scalable
service delivery
by reducing manual processing, paper-based
administration,
repeated verification checks and
duplicated service journeys,
and that certainly was discussed over the
last few days.
In that sense, it's not just a new app.
It's part of the infrastructure that
can help public services work better
across organizations.
We have just concluded a comprehensive
public consultation process,
and I'm delighted to say that Ireland is
moving into a national pilot testing phase,
over the coming days, so really exciting
times for Ireland.
Just to summarize, I've got a couple of
key takeaways for you.
Digital sovereignty is becoming a
strategic issue for government.
Open source enhances transparency,
flexibility and resilience.
Ireland has an opportunity to adopt a more
open by default mindset where appropriate.
Digital sovereignty is not about owning
every technology.
It's about ensuring that we retain
meaningful control, choice and resilience
in the technologies that underpin our
public services.
Thank you very much, and I look forward to
hearing from the panel.
[applause] I want to thank all our keynote
speakers.
So this is the end of our opening
ceremony,
and now we're going to move to the first
panel of the day.
We have a very exciting set of speakers
joining us for the first panel,
so the first panel will delve into the
important topic of open source
and digital sovereignty in a connected
world.
With that, I want to call our panelists to
join us here on the floor,
so we have with us as a moderator Ruth
Ziles.
She's the president of Apache Software
Foundation.
[applause] Thank you, Omar.
This is the third time that
a lot of us have been here -- many of us
the first time --
but the third time for a few the fourth
under the name OSPO's for Good,
now under open source week here at the UN.
But I think it's important to think
aboutwhy we're so
excited to be in this special place.
And for me, it's because the preamble to
the UN Charter,
written so long ago before any of us were
thinking about open source,
actually says to promote social progress
and
better standards of life in larger freedom
and to employ international machinery
forthe promotion of the economic and
social advancements of all peoples
and that we have resolved to combine our
efforts to accomplish these aims.
To me, the UN Charter itself is built on
open source principles,
and that's why it's so wonderful to all
come together here.
I've been looking at these banners all
week with
the SDG wheel in the middle of open source
and it's such a perfect and natural fit
using the combined efforts and collaboration
and the open source way to meet those
goals.
But we have a lot to do to make that
happen.
As Jim mentioned a few minutes ago, there
are a lot of us in here
WHO have been doing open source for a very
long time.
Now we're here under the spanner of UN
open source week.
If you have been involved in the open
source ecosystem for,let's say
less than like 10 years
look around,find someone WHOlooks like
they've been doing this for
more like 20 or 30
like Jim or some of those folks he
mentioned,
and ask if back then they could have
imagined that they would be here in the UN
with something this big and
growing every year called open source week
at the United Nations
and how amazing that is.
And I say all of this to remind us how the
technology landscape has changed in those
decades
and how much it's still changing and even
more rapidly every day.
I think we all feel that strongly.
And today governments around every part of
the world are looking at the fact that
critical systems
the very critical pieces of infrastructure
thatwe all depend on every day for
absolutely everything
often run on technology that they cannot
inspect and thus cannot fully understand.
We're seeing a massive shift in the way
thatgovernments andpublic institutions think
abouttechnology
and open source is now a big part of that
conversation.
So fora lot of folks in this room,open
source has been their careers but
really their lives
and they've known aboutthe benefits
andimportance of the open source way formany
many years.
For some WHO are newer to it though,
it can feel a little bit like a magical
solution to digital sovereignty questions,
to other technological challenges.
But it's not that simple and so we have a
lot to discuss.
Open source matters for sovereignty not
simply because of lower costs,
although there is this huge benefit in the
collaboration enabling shared investment
of multiple organizations coming together
to solve the same problems.
But open source matters because of
transparency, because it is inspectable.
It matters because it enables local
capacity building.
It matters fora lot of reasons,but it's
not automatic and
it's not without all of those people
WHO are depending on it becoming
participants in that ecosystem.
Code being available is not the same as an
organization being able to use it wisely
or to contribute to it responsibly or to
sustain it over time.
And those are where the structure of an
open source program office or an OSPO,
this OSPO is for good title, becomes
important.
Because an OSPO is the mechanism thatlets
an organization engage with
the open source community
and to do sostrategically instead of
perhaps haphazardly
perhaps a little accidentally
or even worse not at all.
And so in companies for probably about 15
years now,
OSPOs have been this structure thatpeople
like our panelists that
you'll meet in a minute
have tremendously helped their organizations
to responsibly consume open source,
to contribute back to it,and to really
build relationships with
those external communities.
What's newer is the emergence of those
OSPOs in government institutions,
in international organizations, in public
institutions,
and the particular andspecific challenges
andopportunities really that
those contexts create.
Because a government or public institution
OSPO is not exactly the same as
a corporate one.
The accountability structures are different,
the procurement rules are different,
the relationship to the public interest is
different, there are different concerns.
But there's certainly no shortage of
enthusiasm foropen source and
policy circles right now.
So what we need and what I hope this
conversation in the next little bit will produce
is more clarity aboutwhat it actually
takes to make this work
what we all need to be doing.
So our panelists forthe next little bit
are looking at all of this every day from
different perspectives.
They're going to help us look at how OSPOs
can help public institutions,
how to balance sovereignty matters with
the realities of a deeply interconnected
global tech ecosystem
and how to be genuine contributors to the
communities that
these organizations are depending on
and the importance of being a part of this
ecosystem that
we're all here appreciating this week.
So I'd like to welcome our panelists to
join me up here.
We have Margaret Dawson, the Chief
Marketing Officer of SUSA.
Arun Gupta, Director of Open Source
Ecosystem and Developer Platform at Inbedia.
Sacha Komudo,Chairwoman of Open Forum
Europe andSenior Researcher at RISE
the Research Institute of Sweden.
Adriana Gro, CEO of Sovereign Tech Agency.
And Frank Karlichek, Founder and CEO of
Next Cloud.
Thank you.
You have to turn them on.
Test test. Hey, we're all in technology.
I don't know how many times something like
this has happened out in the world,
and I've said if only I worked in
technology and knew someone WHO could help.
So asI was saying,Margaret,you've been a
leader at multiple companies that
I would describe as
generally being focused on open source, if
not entirely dependent on it.
So can you lead us in with the key
functions that an OSPO should perform,
particularly to support long-term
organizational resilience and
control over critical digital systems?
Yeah, I love that. I think there's a few
key things,
and I should first say thank you and
welcome.
I love seeing this incredible village of
global citizens here today.
I think the open source program office
does multiple things,
and I think what's important to note, and
you and I have spoken of this before,
is that it's not just technical.
So there is some key things that I think
the open source office can do
from a technology perspective, whether
that be helping you identify risk
of current technologies and the cost of
exiting those potential technologies.
Identifying open source
projects,communities,and technologies that
fit the goals of the organization.
And I would say one of the things that
helps the open source office be successful
and be more resilient for the organization
is to make sure everything that office
and initiative is doing ties to the broader
mission of the country or vision of the
organization.
So the other thing I've seen very
successful is to get the open source office
involved in procurement.
Have them help with vendor selection to
both do that risk management,
but also think about all the ways these
things fit together, interoperability,
the future architectural vision.
So I think when the open source office
really builds resilience and success
is when it plays that overlay role across
your organization,
looking at everything from the culture of
the organization,
because one of the things I've seen a lot
is that we can speak about transparency
as we all have been doing, but if your
culture does not support that,
it's very hard to become an open source
first or driven organization or government
if everything else is a black box, both
culturally and technically.
So from a culture perspective, your code
of conduct, the way you operate,
how you choose technologies, how you exit
from technologies,
and how you think about security and
vulnerabilities and business continuity
from an open perspective,I think,are all
key things that
an open source office can play.
Thanks, Morgan. I love that. I've often
said you can tell a lot about how a company
truly feels aboutopen source based on
wherethey place their OSPO,what team that
sits in.
And so it's definitely worth thinking
about if you're establishing one
in an organization for the first time,
thinking about where it sits,
and I love what you're saying about making
sure it stretches across the organization.
Satchiko, as governments and public
institutions seek greater digital sovereignty,
what role do you feel that OSPO's play in
helping them make more informed choices?
Yeah,thanks,Ruth,and can I also take the
moment just to say I'm happy to be here for
the fourth time?
Yes, Adriana was also here four years ago.
(Applause)
I heard somebody mention five times, but I
think that was a hallucination, right?
Yeah, okay. So I think, you know, I'm
bringing the European perspective,
and I don't know, Omar didn't ask how many
people had traveled in from Europe,
but, you know, for me, it's refreshing to
hear that some of the concerns
that European governments are discussing,
that those are also being discussed,
not just in terms of like Europe and
competing with the US and China,
but thatthese are also concerns
forcountries like Tanzania,for Sierra Leone
for Jamaica andMorocco,et cetera.
So I think that's really refreshing,that
digital sovereignty is not being defined as
a zero-sum game.
But in a way that
your own sovereignty doesn't necessarily
impinge on somebody else's sovereignty.
I think that's really important,that it's
aboutbringing user control into
the discussion.
So the question is about sort of the role
of Ospos.
And I think that, for me, I've been in the
intersection of policy and open source,
promoting public policies around open
source andopen source in public procurement
forclose to 20 years.
So I've not been involved in the technical
side of open source
but really on the policy side fora long
time.
And sowhat we're seeing now is thatin
Europe,at least
and I see now also in other countries
that this is really at the top of the
agenda.
And I think we have seen some of these
things before
some of these high-level endorsements of
open source.
I've seen that,you know,after the global
financial crisis
there were many open source first policies
adopted in various member states.
But when you look at what happened after
those, you know, high-level endorsements,
oftentimes they were not translated into,you
know,anything changing in real-term and
frankier,as you're smiling there.
It didn't translate into change public
procurement outcomes.
And soI think thatthe Ospos andpublic
sector Ospos are really key to turning now
whenwe have a second wave of sort of open
source endorsement at the highest level
turning those endorsements intosort of
operational capability
because at the end of the day,that's
what's going to be needed.
And so,again,open source,we've heard
thatseveral times,open source,for me,was never
aboutonly code or licenses.
It was about collaboration, open
collaboration.
And I think Ospos have unlocked thatability
fororganizations to collaborate for
the private sector.
And now,hopefully,they're doing thatfor
the public sector aswell,because -- and
this is my final point here --
everybody thinks thatopen collaboration
andbuilding on top of each other's solutions
andet cetera,it makes a lot of sense.
And it makes a lot of sense,especially
forthe public sector,and maybe,in particular
you know,even more sofor the global
south,as we heard during the first day
the first panel, which I've found very
inspiring, it makes a lot of sense.
It doesn't mean thatindividuals WHO
need to kind of implement these policies
will automatically collaborate.
Collaboration is actually difficult,
especially for public sector.
There might be also regulatory concerns.
Can we actually, as a public official,
engage with third parties?
Can we contribute code? What's the
liability there?
Can we even join an effort,you know,a
collaborative effort withthe private sector
et cetera?
So,there are a lot of things,guidelines,clear
rules andcapabilities andexpertise
thatneeds to be centralized somehow.
And I think that
the OSPO's -- public sector OSPO's can
play a key role in enabling that,so.
Thanks.
That's a great segue to some thoughts I
think Adriana has forus about
what happens after the OSPO.
So,for a lot of government agencies
building their open source capacity
they create the OSPO.
But from where the sovereign tech agency
sits, what's missing if they stop there?
What does it take to support the ecosystem
beyond that?
So,we thought aboutthe roles we see in the
open source ecosystem and
the sovereign tech agency being a
company,basically
underneath the German government.
We had long conversations back in the day
withthe Ministry of Economic Affairs
in our case,in 2021.
But what is the role of a government in
securing this ecosystem
this open source ecosystem thatthey rely
on?
And I think formany here in this
room,being part for
20 or even more years or 10 years,we heard
aboutthis.
Of this ecosystem,they understand it way
better than -- maybe by now
but a few years back,many governments did.
So,we really started froma really
high-level point talking about,well
why should you invest public money in the
public interest in public code?
And why is it not enough to just think
about tools or services that you're using?
So,we always used thatanalogy,which,of
course,has its shortcomings,but it works well
fora starting point of physical
infrastructure of the roads andbridges.
And we said,well
you would never expect volunteers to
maintain it in the public's interest.
That's not sustainable.
You need to have some level of agency here
andrepresent the public's interest and
invest.
So,we see the Sub-intech agency asan
instrument that
we also believe should exist in every
government that
is complementary to what an OSPO is doing.
So,the OSPOs are basically managing the
institution's own relationship with
open source software
whereas the Sub-intech agency is looking
at the upstream at the commitment to the
commonly shared foundation
that, yeah, we all rely on.
And we need to do this becausewe have a
failure here
a structural failure in this ecosystem.
And it's incredible,and becauseof the work
of many,if not all,people here
that it worked soextremely well forsuch a
long time.
But volunteer open source community members
shouldn't become involuntary suppliers
to services
thatare extremely critical,not just
forbusinesses,but also forgovernments
for everyone,really.
So, when I said roles, we do see roles for
companies, businesses, definitely.
We also see a very important role for
governments, for public institutions.
And,of course,a continued,very,very
important role forthe open source community
but one whereyou are not burdened suddenly
by caring for
incredibly critical software components
andnot having a way out.
This is not how it works.
So,this is what we need to fix
and that's the role of the Sub-intech
agency in this ecosystem withothers.
Absolutely. Thanks. Let's talk a little.
Agree.
So, let's dive a little more into the
digital sovereignty topic.
So,as I mentioned,while there's a lot of
passion now forthe ways that
open source can help withdigital
sovereignty,the reality is that
we live in a highly interconnected global
technology ecosystem.
So, Arun, how can institutions balance
those two things?
Yeah,if you think aboutdigital sovereignty
I think Assistant Security General really
called it out very well.
You know,if the antidote of open source is
not there,some would win
but many would lose.
So, I think that's the essence to me that
I'm going to carry back with us.
So,it's essential thatwhen we think in
terms of the corporate,you know
and I work at NVIDIA,we always think
aboutsort of the sovereign AI aspect of it
you know,how there are players all across
the industry.
You know,players like NABIAs,players like
Cloudway,you know
running really sovereign clouds.
So,this enables the companies thatare
running governments,institutions that
are running their local data.
They should own it.
They should own the compute.
They should own the data.
They should own the infrastructure.
They should have the skill.
I really enjoyed the discussion that the
person from Morocco was saying earlier.
They're going to train 100, 000 people
every year until 2030.
That is what gets you ready to be
sovereign in that sense.
So,I think it's a collective impetus on
the overall institutions
the commercial institutions,on how do you
enable it?
And I think the other element thatI would
like to say is we,of course,have an OSPO
essentially.
So,the way to think aboutthis is if digital
sovereignty is wherewe want to get to
OSPO is really the intention
that allows you to get there.
And I think Ruth talked about,Margaret,you
talked abouthow OSPOs help it out
essentially.
Transparency,auditability,all of those are
critical elements,you know
that how do you really own it sothat in
case there is a CVE
you can trace it,that whereis it
happening,and you can then work with
the right players in this room.
I think you mentioned this.
There's probably a few thousand years of
collective open source experience in this
room.
So, if we cannot solve this together, WHO
else will?
So, I think it is a collective impetus on
us and the corporate side as well.
We should add that up.
We'll make a little form somewhere
everybody can write down their years of
open source experience.
We'll add up the collective years of open
source experience of everyone in the room.
So,Frank,I've heard you talk about
what you've built at Next Cloud in terms
of its benefits to digital sovereignty
versus the alternatives.
I don't think we can solve all of
everyone's problems in the next few minutes
but in practice,what are the biggest
struggles whenmaking thattransition?
Is it technical? Is it organizational?
Yeah, thanks a lot.
First of all, I want to say it's really
great to be here at this event.
I'm not here for the first time, only the
third time, so I feel like a newcomer now.
But, yeah, I mean, it's really great in
open source.
It's like soimportant,more important than
ever
especially now in the geopolitical
climate.
And I mean, I start -- I'm one of those
people WHO do open source for 30 years.
And,of course,30 years ago,this was a
nerdy topic,was done by IT guys and
mostly guys in the basement.
And,yeah,it's crazy to see thatwe're now
here together at the United Nations
so you can really see how something that
was just some boring infrastructure thing
is now strategic in geopolitical.
And this is really interesting to see an
ospost of a player critical role for
this transition thatmore andmore people
understand what it is,the benefits,how it is
and,yeah,to bring it to more andmore
people.
I find it also very interesting thatthe
whole open source model withthe licenses and
the way everybody collaborates over the
Internet was,like,created by engineers for
engineers,basically,to work together over
the Internet on the same thing that
everybody is sharing.
Everybody has a place on the table.
Everybody has a level playing field.
And it's socool andgreat that
the same model actually also works on this
geopolitical stage
where you can all collaborate andwe all
have the same rights on the code.
We can use it for whatever we want.
And it's really interesting that
the open source model really was able to
make this transition
so this is really great.
So you ask about the challenges.
That's interesting.
So becauseas an engineer fora long time,I
thought thatthe challenge with
adoption of open source is
technical,right?
And the software needs to be better.
But, I mean, now it's clearly no longer
the problem.
I mean, solutions next to many others.
They're clearly, like, good enough for
everybody.
And then I thought, okay, what's then
holding back the adoption?
Maybe it's some difficult procurement or
some marketing or other things.
But it's,for me,it's really clear thatwhat's
needed now,they're no longer excuses.
It's just everything is there.
And what is needed is someone WHOhas the
will and
the commitment to actually introduce open
source strategies intoorganizations.
And we have many, many examples nowadays.
And this is really good as references.
But what needs nowadays is to just do it.
No longer excuses to not have an open
source strategy.
Frank,I think at the beginning of what you
were saying,you sort of accidentally and
humorously touched on what I think is one
of the biggest problems facing an entire
open source ecosystem now.
So many of us are absolutely delighted
that
what used to be our nerdy passion building
the infrastructure.
We didn't set out for that to run the
world.
But here we are
that open source became the underpinnings
of all global digital infrastructure.
And it is both exhilarating but also a
huge challenge.
And that's where we are and what we're
here talking about.
Adriana, I'd like to come back to you.
So we often hear sovereignty framed as
about control or independence.
But in reality,the infrastructure we fund
is globally maintained andinterdependent
asArun was talking about.
So can you talk a bit about
your thoughts on how public institutions
can look at sovereignty as
more than just self-sufficiency?
I think we heard a good definition from
the Irish CIO about the definition.
And it's important to us to always come
back to making it extra clear that
we don't mean independence becausethat's a
myth.
You will always be dependent on each
other.
It's rather aboutstrategic dependencies,have
more than just one,have many with
partners andbe active in them andsee it as
a clear strategy to be dependent in an
ecosystem whereyou have agency
where you can change,where you can
contribute
where you're not just a passive consumer
of software.
And it's aboutco-creation,it's
aboutopenness,it's exactly aboutthe opposite that
I think some people hear whenthey hear
sovereignty becauseit's not isolation.
So how I'm trying to bring thatpoint across
sometimes is also a simplified picture
butsaying you need to think aboutlayers.
So there's a competitive layer thatis
great because
we want to have the best possible services
andproducts.
So we want to have competition.
So I asa consumer of software products,I
want to be able to decide for
one tool over another becauseI like it
better because
the technology works better or it looks
better.
That's all my choice, the same goes for
governments.
And that's what we need to protect.
But in order to do so,we need to recognize
andreally strengthen,I think
a cooperative layer in this whole
ecosystem
which is the production of software.
Because if thatis not commonly maintained
in our shared interest
we will end up in a situation whereonly a
few are in a position
with the most resources, with the most
power to actually provide services.
And that weakens my choice as a government,
as a consumer, as an individual.
It weakens my ability to also contribute
shape software development.
And that's precisely not what we want.
So whenwe talk aboutsovereignty asthe
sovereignty agency
we look at the cooperative layer in this
competitive system of software production
wherewe all win if we work together
andalmost all lose if we don't.
And sovereignty in the end means having
choices.
And we can only have choices if we
maintain a common foundation to start with.
Thanks.
So piecing these two parts together,the
OSPO's andthe digital sovereignty and
all of the other goals.
Arun, can you come back around to how
OSPO's can help with this?
Give us thoughts on how international
organizations,government
public institutions can build OSPO's
thatgenuinely contribute back
to this ecosystem?
Absolutely.
I think Adriana, you touched it very well.
Sovereignty is not about competition, it's
about interoperability.
It's enabling thatchoice
and I think under Secretary General
Amandip also called it out that
imagine somebody in Rwanda has a compute
skills.
Somebody in Senegal has the actual human
skills,somebody is the data
and they're all able to work together to
get the job done.
And as I said earlier, OSPO is really the
catalyst for that.
And sothe several roles thatOSPO can
play,for example
as you start consuming open source,they
need to make sure that
your CDE's vulnerabilities don't go
unidentified.
And they build mechanisms in thatsense
sothat you're a good consumer of open source.
That's step number one.
Step number two is you don't want to fork
the open source andkeep it inside because
then you're going to create technical
debt.
Then you're going to build your own
engineering resources to maintain that work.
And that's going to be expensive becausethen
you're not going to be able to tap into
the innovation thatis happening out in the
community.
So they educate,they build the
system,contribute back,they build the processes
the approval forms,whatever thatneeds to
be done sothat they can contribute back.
Another important point,which is often not
highlighted enough
is how did they do open source advocacy
within the organization thatthey're part of?
Whether it's academic,whether it's
corporate,whether it's government
they become the open source champions.
They tell people what is the right
language, don't create your own languages.
When we talk about open source, OSI has
defined four freedoms.
Talk in that language.
Do not create your own languages.
So in thatsense,they truly play thatbridge
role between the outside world and
the inside world.
Some of whichmay be accurate,but then
again,make sure thatit is fully aligned with
the outside world sothat whenthe corporate
people goes out in the outside world
they're fully tuned,they're fully
aligned,they're fully ready
and they're able to talk the exact same
language,but in the same room.
>> Thanks.
So adjacent to that,Margaret,though,what
are the organizational barriers that
are preventing the wider adoption of
OSPO's in these institutions?
>> I think you could almost tie that
to what are the barriers to the open
source adoption
because I think it goes hand in hand.
And I think a lot of it is we become too
performative in our words and
use of open source or openness
but we go back to where we feel safe, which
is the black box closing in isolation.
And soI think the biggest barrier is we
don't take the true value and
promise of open source andopen culture
which is interoperability, which you just
spoke to, transparency.
I always say you can't secure what you
can't see in the early days
and I am one of those people,as Ruth
mentioned,that has been doing open source for
over 20 years,I'll say,just to be safe.
I think when I add it up, I get closer to
30, which sounds terrifying.
But the reality is I've always said open
source is more secure
and even if you look at all the
vulnerabilities we've recently had in Linux
the effort globally thatcame together to
fix those vulnerabilities just can't happen
whenyou're a single organization witha
code base thatyou have,even if you had 10
000 engineers
you don't have access to literally the
global mind share of that.
So take thatback into
an organization within your own government
or your own enterprise
and what is keeping you fromthat
collaboration.
The same thing happens in our governments
and organizations.
We become siloed, right?
We don't share information, and that keeps
us from innovating.
So I love what was just said aboutthe
competitive andcooperative layer
because I truly believe,and maybe I'm an
optimist,but there is somuch white space.
There is not scarcity in this world from
a technology perspective or a digital
transformation or our ability to be both
collaborative
andsovereign.
There is somuch potential andspace forus
all to win
and I think it takes things like this
where
we are looking at the power of the
village,the power of collaboration.
So how do we keep this momentum going in
communities like this
and then how do we take thatback to our
countries andto our organizations to keep
thatgoing,and be thatinfluencer,be
thatdisruptor,frankly
because in some situations it is not a
popular sentiment
because people feel very safe within their
silo or their black box,and so
you're asking them to think differently.
But I think the more thatwe can do to
think abouttechnology and
our organizations in a more
modular,composable,flexible way,someone said it earlier
thatI think was beautiful,that the spirit
of openness andopen source is that
flexibility,that choice
and that isn't at odds with sovereignty
and security, they go hand in hand.
So if it makes you feel better,Margaret,or
anyone else in here,technically speaking
the term open source forsoftware was
coined on February 6,1998,so under thatname
none of us can quite say 30 years yet.
So technically speaking, and we're all big
fans of technically correct here, right?
It's a very best kind of correct.
So I want to ask everyone,before we take
questions foryour final thoughts
if there was something you wish I had
asked you anddidn't
or the one takeaway you'd like to give
everyone.
So while you're thinking about that, I do
have one more question from Adriana.
So folks WHO are here on Monday may have
come.
We had a little bit of a session aboutthe
future of the open source ecosystem
particularly fromthe perspective of
underfunded projects,in some cases
volunteer maintainers burn out.
What do you feel like is the role that
public investment can play in addressing
this structural problem?
And I think you touched on it, but I'd
love to hear a little more.
Well, I can say I'm also a helpless
optimist.
And I think actually pessimism is a waste
of time.
So I believe thatthe past four
years,five,being here
so much has changed already in governments
recognizing the value that
has been created
recognizing the structural challenges,and
thateven maybe we have an ecosystem that
is reaching a tipping point.
And that we need to be extremely careful.
We also heard about the impact of AI on
the open source ecosystem.
We need to be extremely careful right
now,not pessimist,but careful about
losing something thatis incredibly hard to
measure in its value.
There has been attempts to measure what's
the worth of it
but the worth isn't just in the monetary,in
the business models thatall rely on it
in the innovational strength or the
competitiveness.
I think the value is also in the whole
mode of how we work together, collaborate,
and that we won't be able to succeed if we
are not doing it that way.
And it's incredible thatit has been
created during the past 20 years
longer than that,but it's a beautiful
thing.
And I believe thatbusinesses are taking up
their part,creating hospitals,realizing
thatthey need to invest,contribute back.
But I'm also hopeful thatgovernments
understand that
if they are not playing a role in this
ecosystem
protecting it,believing thatthis is a
public duty thatthey should fulfill
that is a key priority.
It's a tough sales pitch sometimes
becauseit's soinvisible,it's sodecentralized
and then we're talking abouthow it has to
be like this
because that's what makes it successful.
But governments using public
procurement,investing in open source software that
is crucial forthem andcrucial forall of us
is I think one key pillar forthe open
source ecosystem,not just
it's not a vice versa,it's not
aboutdriving anybody out
private interest,public interest,and the
communities together
I think can really create a
healthy,sustainable structural model for
using and producing software in the
future.
Amazing, thanks.
Okay, one or two minute final thoughts
before we take questions, Arun.
Sure. I think I would go with the code
that Minister of Tanzania said earlier.
This is about ownership in partnership,
but not independence.
When we open our solutions, we multiply
them.
Let's put our solutions at the center, not
vendors, and I love that quote.
And my guidance would be,when you are
thinking aboutyour solutions,think about
why not open source.
Put open source first asthe philosophy,put
thatas the rule,and non-open source as
an exception,which has to be justified.
Think about it hard. Create mechanisms.
Don't say this is a guideline.
Create mechanisms. Create policies.
Create rules within your organization,
corporate.
Wherever role you are. Encourage that
behavior.
So that is the way we're going to achieve
digital sovereignty.
Thank you. Agree, thank you.
I think of it as default to open.
Margaret?
I'm going to go to my second passion in
the world beyond technology
which is diversity andinclusion
because this is quite rare to see a panel
like this on open source,I will be honest.
So Frank kind of spoke to the fact this
started in many basements.
But the one thing we can all do is make
open source communities more diverse,and
thatcan mean different perspectives,different
cultures,different ethnicities
different genders,all of those areas of
diversity,and importantly more inclusive.
Open source communities are not always
safe spaces
and the only way we're going to truly
succeed andinnovate andbecome both sovereign
andhave thatflexibility andchoice is by
creating safe spaces whereeveryone feels
thatthey can participate andinnovate
together.
And kind of going just one step forward on
that,what I say you can also do is with
your vendors,which are critical to this
overall supply chain in our success
is to make sure thatthey are not locking
you in
that they are also looking at
interoperability using emerging standards
like the MCP proxies and gateways and
other parts of the AI ecosystem.
There's already a lot of close source that
is happening in the AI innovation
spectrum.
And the more all of you asconsumers
andcommunity members force your vendors and
your partners to stay open andwork
together,the more successful we will be.
And if I may give a brief shout out to the
open source initiative has been working
on an open source AI definition
forthe last couple of years andconversations
aboutrefinement of thatare continuing
sowould invite everyone to participate on
thattopic at open source.org aswell.
Adriana?
I feel like I said enough butmaybe be
proud aboutyour work because
it might have started in a basement.
And as a little, you know, just my
personal nerdy little hobby.
But although the open source community
isn't in the news
there are other names in the news,this
community is literally running the world.
And there's power in this community.
So understanding that and not feeling shy
or like we're weak.
I think, you know, we, it's actually, this
is a testament to it.
We're really powerful.
Thank you. Frank.
I wanted to make the point thattechnically
before open source
there was free software.
Yes, but that goes into the 80s and then
we all get old again.
I suggest to keep this kind of warmth
closed for now.
Yeah, so I think the benefit of open
source and free software is it's so broad.
There's somany points already was pointed
out lots of things here like from
vendor login forbenefits froman economic
perspective,from an innovation perspective.
It has so many benefits.
And asI said before
there's really no reason to not do
software in an open source way.
So why not?
Thank you.
And Sachika.
Yeah,so I'm going to close on an exciting
topic
which I wish we had discussed a bit
more,which is on public procurement,right?
Yes, everybody is very excited standards
of public procurement.
That's a good way to alienate people at in
Brussels.
So,but becausereally forme,this is where
we're going to operationalize digital
sovereignty.
And I think also tying thatto the work
thatAdriana is doing at the Silver and
Tech Agency,I think thatwe cannot rely on
charity forsustaining and
maintaining critical digital
infrastructure.
And I think we have to work withvarious
market mechanisms
including public procurement,to make sure
thatthis is not an afterthought and
that the public sector doesn't procure the
cheapest solution withone
you know,on the one hand,and then on the
other hand
has to finance the maintenance of critical
infrastructure.
So I'd like to see rules around,you
know,in public procurement
where we can have a preference
forsustainable digital solutions when
we procure software andservices.
And really to make sure thatit's possible
forgovernments to have a preference for
vendors WHOcan show that
they're making meaningful contributions to
our shared digital infrastructure.
So that's a kind of low-hanging fruit for
me.
And I think thatthat's whereI'd like to
see some concrete,you know
developments until next year.
Great.
Thank you.
Thank you to all of you.
I'd like to open it up if anyone has
questions for our panel.
Oh, we have lots of questions for our
panel. Let's start right here.
Thank you very much.
My name is Matthew Saunders.
I've been working in open source since
1999, mostly in Drupal.
I currently work for a company called
Amazee.io.
It's an open source company thathas been
focused on hosting,open source hosting
and most recently on AI.
Several of you compared open source to
public infrastructure like roads andbridges
which I absolutely love.
If governments and
companies increasingly depend on open
source's critical infrastructure
how do we press them thatthey have an
obligation to fund its long-term maintenance?
And if so, what does that model actually
look like?
Who would like to take that?
Yeah, I think it starts with awareness,
first of all, right?
Because I think that we are...
It's nice to have high-level ministers
recognizing thatopen source is not just about
you know,saving on licenses,et cetera,but
thatcomes withother considerations.
I think thatwas the minister fromJamaica
WHOreally listed some of the obligations
andsome of the concerns andcapabilities
that
you have to have in place in order to make
this shift.
So I think it starts...
It's nice to see thathere,but I don't
think that
that's prevalent in all the member states,and
I think thatit starts withan awareness
thatwe are relying on this infrastructure.
Then,I think to some extent,once thatsinks
in,then there is going to be an opening
forsome of the solutions.
And obviously,Adriana,the Southern Tech
Agency
and maybe possibly a European-wide Southern
Tech Agency is part of thatsolution.
Yeah,I could not have said it better,but
to say it in different words,we always say
thatwe see three steps in this mission
here.
One is rightly awareness becauseit is not
asobvious foreverybody as
it might be in this room how software is
produced.
That it's not like raining fromthe heavens
or just starting from
scratch every time you build a new
service,you have a blank page and
you start coding.
That's not how it works,but that's not
obvious,so you need to find people WHO
take their time to listen andunderstand a
system and
why this system works well or doesn't work
well.
And that's the first step.
The second step is then we need a new set
of public instruments.
We don't have them yet.
Public procurement even isn't yet designed
really to maintain decades old software
components.
That is a challenge and
also what kind of funding or procurement
rather mechanisms we need.
And the third,of course,you need to then
demonstrate thatit actually has impact
becauseyou're working in a political
system.
You're spending taxpayer's money.
You need to be able to concretely say this
has been invested andthis was the impact.
It's not asobvious,unfortunately,as a new
road or bridge thatcitizens use and
see every day,but I used thatanalogy
aswell andsaying,well
we would never just build a bridge andthen
have a few maintainers,not maintainers
a few volunteers.
Check it, irregularly, and go like, yeah,
okay, that sounds fine.
So, yeah, it's a conversation that we need
to have.
And we're having it right now.
We're having it on the European
level,too,which is,I think
a good sign how this mission is expanding.
And if I had a perspective withthat,you
know,I've been in the corporate side for
about 30 years.
This was not common 10,15 years ago
where the corporates would actually fund
maintainers on the open source project.
For the last 10,15 years only,you know,I
worked at Amazon,Apple,Intel,Nvidia
all of these companies were funding full-time
maintainers just to do the job would
carry water work
becausethat's what makes open source
projects sustainable.
So,I'm hoping to exactly what,you
know,Sachiko andAdriana are talking about
that the way corporates have evolved over
the last 10,15 years,you know
maybe in the next OSPO forgood or UN open
source week,you know
one of the ministers come andsay here
that,hey,you know what?
We pay this full-time maintainer just to
contribute to the open source project
becausethis project is critical forus.
So I think it's an evolution that's going
to happen over the years.
Thanks. I think we had a question over
here. Yes.
Hi. I'm Vinny J. Swell.
I also have been fortunate enough to work
withsome of the panelists and
people here in the room.
So thank you for the opportunity to be in
this room. I know we came a long way.
So my question to piggyback on what the
panelists already covered.
We have spent quite a good amount of time
aboutdigital sovereignty through
the lens of open source software.
AI introduces a new dependency stack,compute
capital energy,proprietary data and
multi-billion dollar infrastructure
investments.
So asfoundation models become increasingly
expensive to build and
operate is software.
I don't think software openness alone is
enough.
What can we do?
Because here in this room we have
governments,public sectors and,you know
private sectors aswell.
What role can we play to make more
investments towards compute sovereignty
investment sovereignty asequally important
asdigital sovereignty?
Yeah.
I'll just start withone place you can
begin is thatanyone WHO
has managed a data center before can tell
you thatno one runs at 100% utilization.
And the one thing I've seen forboth
governments and
the enterprise is the place you can start
to look at where
you have capacity you can reuse today.
So usually this is universal thatI've seen
for30 years thatmost servers and
data centers run at somewhere between 40
to 50% utilization.
So whereI would begin becauseI'm guessing
governments and
enterprises don't have unlimited new funds
to invest in AI,right?
This is the challenge andyou're probably
not getting all of the hardware and
there's huge supply chain issues right
now.
So start to think abouthow do I move off
potentially proprietary systems
systems I'm not fully utilizing some of my
technical debt
leverage open source,leverage existing
capacity
create a phased roadmap to
modernization,including your AI investments.
Or if nothing else thatallows you to
reduce cost andtechnical debt
so maybe you can invest more in innovation
like AI.
So I would just say that's a place that
anyone can start today.
Frank, you have additional thoughts?
Yeah,so assome of you might know,next
cloud is the solution for
decentralized collaboration.
So we actually work a lot with
decentralized infrastructure.
I think maybe a controversial statement
forme
but there's also a bit of a marketing
problem.
Because our hyperscaler friends,they're
really market the narrative that
only there can provide the infrastructure
that's needed forthe future.
And this is not true, this is not true.
I'm personally not a fan of the term
hyperscaler at all becausehyperscaler means
thatyou need to be hyper to scale.
This is totally not true.
There are millions of next cloud instances
in the world running on non-hyperscalers
totally fine.
And if I were to add an angle,Nvidia works
witha lot of Nvidia cloud partners
these are all local sovereign cloud
partners.
And we just launched a new platform called
DSX thatreally tells you exactly how from
land power shell all the way to token
generation,that entire stack.
And my job really is to make sure that
stack stays open source.
So I think thatis a way,instead of us
facilitating,enabling partners and
our customers andour competitors,see what
they want to do,keep that
stack in the open source andlet the
innovation happen over there.
So I think it's going to take time, but the
head is in the right direction at least.
Thanks. More questions? Yes.
Yes.
I would like to bring this intoalso the
social aspect of government and
government auspose andsomeone
mentioned,you know
that you're not really able to be
digitally sovereign without collaboration.
And that's, of course, Hannah Arendt.
You can't be free without being with other
people.
And that's something that's really central
to government as well.
And also with open source, community-based
open source.
How can government auspose help create
sustainable open source communities around
software?
Because whenI speak to government open
source projects,they often struggle with
creating communities.
And when you have a community, a community
is democratic collaboration.
And it is free,it is peaceful coexistence,it
is really these fundamental values that
we have in government andalso the United
Nations.
Go ahead. Yeah, Matias. Thank you.
I agree with your definition also.
Freedom is not possible without
interdependence or,you know
maybe I'm paraphrising now,but I think
thatthat's also where
the European Commission has landed.
Finally,there was a lot of discussion
around sort of by European and
now it's more potentially by,you know,with
Europe,if you will.
And really making sure thatwe are not
dependent for
critical infrastructure on one single
country.
There is an ecosystem recognition that
we should play a bigger strategic role in
an interdependent,you know,supply chain.
But so I think to your question, I think
that again, hospitals can play a role there.
And if we really designate public sector
officials assome sort of tech diplomats
if you will,with the sort of mandate to
collaborate externally.
I think this is really,I think thatwe see
that
with some countries already having a sort
of a tech envoy or a tech representative
or something like that.
But within public sector institutions,you
could see thatOspos should have this
not just this internal,be an internal
center of excellence
but also have this mandate to collaborate
withother Ospos andother organizations.
And I think this really,you could create a
sort of a diplomatic core,if you will
of open source professionals.
And soI think this is,you know,again,I'm
bringing the European perspective
but we had a tech sovereignty package and
an open source strategy published just
this month.
And there you can see thatone of the
concrete commitments from
the European Commission was actually to
establish a European network of government
Ospos.
So I think this is something that could be
replicated elsewhere.
And once you start to connecting those
Ospos witheach other,you can also,I think
leverage some of the learnings forhow to
collaborate also withthird parties.
I think we have time for one more brief
question.
Second right there. Yes. Yes.
Hi, can you hear me? Yes.
Thank you so much. This was really, really
insightful.
I had two quick questions.
One was regarding,I think,the challenges
starting to use open source forpeople WHO
are looking at,you know,moving their
existing systems onto open source.
One that was already shared was on open
data.
That data aspect is not that mature.
And my other quick question is,for those
WHOare new to Ospos
how would you encourage them to get started
andwhere should they go to get started?
Thank you. I can maybe address the second
question is really quick answer.
The Linux Foundation has this to-do group.
And aspart of the to-do group,they have
very extensive research,studies,playbooks
guidebooks on how to build an
OSPO,different levels.
What should that funding look like?
Start with one person, two person, so
highly recommend that.
I would like somebody else answer the
first question.
I'm told we have no more time.
So unless you have the quickest answer in
the world, I'm going to wrap things up.
So I would like to thank all our
panelists.
I'm also going to thank you in advance
forwhat I'm aboutto volunteer you for
which is thatin the Apache software
foundation,we have a bit of an unofficial motto.
It's also the name of our conference.
It's community over code.
And that's becausewe recognize thatin open
source
the community is the important part.
A good community can fix bad code,but only
with
a good community do you get the security
andthe resilience and
the long-term sustainability.
And the reason I tell you thatis
becauseI've known
I don't know all of these people super
well,but I've known some of them for
a very long time.
And I know they all believe strongly in
that, as do many other people in this room.
And I know thatfor every one hand thatwe
didn't get to answer a question
there are two or three more WHOdidn't even
raise their hands.
Do not hesitate to talk to any of these
people or anyone else in this room that
you think hasn't answered your questions.
Feel free to look me up on the internet.
I will talk to you.
I'm pretty sure all of these people will
as well, and we're happy to help.
Thank you all. Thank you.
[applause] Wow. I learned so much. This
was an amazing discussion.
Come on, guys. You could do better than
that. Another round of applause.
[applause]
This has been an incredible discussion, and
thank you so much for all our panelists.
While they're taking a picture,I just want
to share with
you what's going to happen next.
As you know, as I mentioned earlier, we
decided to not have panel panel panel.
That was too long, so we are now starting
our breakout portion of the program.
There are four sessions that's starting
now in a few minutes
and they're going to be in four different
rooms.
If you want to stay here,here will be a
great session aboutcountry spotlight Japan
where we're going to learn fromthe city of
Tokyo
the University of Kyoto,private
sector,government,the digital agency
how they are handling all the problems
thatwe've been talking abouttoday.
That's going to be here.
If you want to go to conference room A
there's a great session called Data
Governance forPublic Good,equity,openness
and community stewardship.
That's done by UN audit,UN University,and
a UN agency called UNCTAD for
trade conference.
If you want to go downstairs,also
conference room 11,please remember withme
conference room 11,we have some
slides,maybe you could put the slide up.
It's unlocking the power of open source
for sustainable development.
It's introducing the OSEC, open source
enablement compass.
That's a project that
will be launched today by UN Office of
Digital Emerging Technologies and
the Research Institute of Sweden.
So please, if you want, you should check it
out, conference room number 11 downstairs.
And the last session thatis also happening
downstairs,conference room number 9,it's
aboutfinancing,financing,open source
anddigital public good
multi-stakeholder approach thatis run by
Inter-American Development Bank and
have a number of other multi-development
banks.
So thank you very much for all of you.
Sorry, let me also summarize.
If I can have your attention fora few
seconds,so there are those four sessions that
is an hour each,till one o'clock.
The Japan session is the only one that is
hour and a half till one 30.
After that, we're all going to break for
lunch.
And then let's come back again at three
o'clock.
There are four other sessions that are
taking place.
You can see them on the agenda.
I don't think we have them here on the
slide.
Yes,from three to four,there are
four,please take your phone,take a photo
snap a photo,so you know whereyou want to
be.
So fromthree to four,there are four other
breakouts,not actually five
because there's one aboutuniversities.
So we'll meet here fromfour to five wherewe
have the first panel of the afternoon
thatis aboutopen source at the UN.
And then there's a followed by second
panel about level of governance.
So thank you very much. I wish you two
nice, great breakout hours.
And then we meet here at four o'clock.
Thank you.